---
title: 'You Must Be Bourne Again'
date: '2020-07-03'
---

"Forgive me Father, for I have sinned, and I am no longer worthy to be
called your son..." 

Thus went the canned confession of the prodigal son in Jesus' parable.
But before he was able to finish reciting those words, the Father had
run to him, and decreed that a celebration must be made for the beloved
returnee. Such is the lavish grace of God. 

And I will freely confess that I need God's forgiveness for all manner
of unworthy things in my life. But the confession I intend to make here
is less spiritual and more technical. It is that I have been speaking of
`bash` without really meaning `bash` at all.

I have been using the term as if it were precisely synonymous with "the
shell". And we have spoken previously about the subtle difference
between "the shell", "the terminal", and "the command line". But there
is also a subtle difference between the shell program `sh` written for
Unix in the 1970s, developed first by someone called Thompson, and then with 
extra functionality added by someone called Bourne (not [that
Bourne](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FpKaB5dvQ4g)), and the `bash`
shell, which was written by Brian Fox and released in 1989 as part of
the open-soure GNU Project.

The first version is known as the Thompson shell, the next as the
Bourne shell; but instead of calling it the Fox Shell, the GNU version
was called the Bourne Again Shell or `bash`.

And as Jesus said: "[You must be born
again](https://biblehub.com/john/3-7.htm)". But while Jesus' words are
as true as the night he spoke them to Nicodemus, the `bash` shell has
now been replaced as the default [Debian](https://debian.org) system
shell by `dash`, which is itself a Debian port of `ash`, the
Bourne-compatible shell made by someone called Almquist.

But I myself actually use `zsh`, which is another extension of the
Bourne shell, created by Paul Falstad, and pronounced with an American
'zee', so that it's a 'zee-shell' (like she zells on the zeashore).

We will talk about configuring `zsh` as your interactive shell another
time.
